README.adoc, before:

= Showroom AI Assistant Template
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:sectanchors:
:experimental:

A generic, reusable AI assistant template for Red Hat Showroom workshops, built on the foundation of the https://github.com/rhpds/showroom_template_default[standard Showroom template^]. This template provides an intelligent chatbot that can answer questions about workshop content, provide guidance on lab procedures, and assist with Kubernetes operations through MCP (Model Context Protocol) integration.

== ✨ Features

* **🤖 Intelligent Chat Assistant**: RAG-powered chatbot with access to workshop content
* **📚 Content-Aware**: Automatically processes AsciiDoc lab instructions and PDF documentation  
* **🔧 Kubernetes Integration**: Optional MCP tools for cluster operations and troubleshooting
* **🎨 Modern UI**: Clean, responsive chat interface with workshop theming
* **⚙️ Fully Configurable**: Externalized configuration for easy customization
* **🚀 Easy Deployment**: Ready-to-use Kubernetes manifests and build scripts
* **📖 Multi-Format Support**: Handles AsciiDoc, PDF, and Markdown content
* **0% cruft**: Clean, minimal template structure
* **Red Hat Demo Platform UI Bundle default**: Consistent branding and styling
* **Dev Mode extension**: Displays asciidoc attributes for development

== 🚀 Getting Started for Workshop Authors

There are two ways to use this template:

=== Path 1: Start with This Template (New Workshop)

This approach is for creating a new workshop from scratch with AI assistant capabilities built-in.

. **Create a git repo from this template**
.. Suggested naming: `showroom_<lab-name>`
. **Clone your new repo and `cd` into it**
. **Add your workshop content** to `content/modules/ROOT/pages/`
. **Configure the AI assistant** (see <<Configuration Guide>>)
. **Deploy your workshop** (see <<Deployment>>)

=== Path 2: Add AI to Existing Workshop (Patch Approach)

This approach is for adding AI assistant capabilities to an existing showroom workshop.

. **Run the patch script** from this template repo:
+
[source,sh]
----
./patch-existing-showroom.sh /path/to/your-existing-workshop
----

. **Configure the AI assistant** in your existing workshop:
+
[source,sh]
----
cd /path/to/your-existing-workshop

# Customize the AI assistant UI by editing content/antora.yml
# Update these attributes with your workshop-specific values:
#   assistant_name: "Your Assistant Name"
#   workshop_title: "Your Workshop Title" 
#   welcome_message: "Your custom welcome message"
#   sample_question_1: "Your first sample question"
#   sample_question_2: "Your second sample question"
#   sample_question_3: "Your third sample question"

# Configure the backend
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
# Edit .env.yaml with your LLM API configuration
# Edit config/assistant-config.yaml for workshop-specific AI behavior
----

. **Add technical documentation** (optional):
+
[source,sh]
----
# Add PDF files to the techdocs directory created by the patch script
cp your-docs.pdf content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs/
----

. **Deploy the AI assistant backend**:
+
[source,sh]
----
# Deploy the AI backend service to your cluster
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace your-namespace
----

. **Redeploy the workshop frontend**:
+
[source,sh]
----
# Commit the patched files to your existing workshop repository
git add .
git commit -m "Add AI assistant capabilities"
git push

# Trigger a redeployment of your existing workshop
# This is workshop-specific and depends on your deployment setup:
# - For GitOps: The push above should trigger automatic redeployment
# - For manual deployments: Restart/rollout your workshop pods
# - For OpenShift: oc rollout restart deployment/your-workshop-name
----

The patch script copies the following to your existing workshop:

* AI assistant frontend UI (chatbot interface)
* Backend files (`backend/`, `config/`, `Dockerfile`, `.env.yaml.example`, `deploy-backend.sh`)
* Sample workshop files for reference
* Techdocs directory structure for PDF documentation

== 📁 Project Structure

[source,text]
----
showroom-ai-assistant/
├── backend/                    # FastAPI backend service
│   ├── app.py                 # Main application with RAG and MCP
│   └── requirements.txt       # Python dependencies
├── config/                    # Configuration files
│   ├── assistant-config.yaml  # AI behavior and prompts
│   └── mcp-config.yaml        # Kubernetes tools configuration
├── content/                   # Workshop content
│   ├── modules/ROOT/
│   │   ├── pages/            # AsciiDoc lab instructions
│   │   │   ├── index.adoc    # First page of your lab
│   │   │   ├── module-01.adoc
│   │   │   ├── module-02.adoc
│   │   │   └── ai-chatbot.adoc    # AI assistant UI integration
│   │   ├── assets/
│   │   │   ├── images/       # Images used in your content
│   │   │   └── techdocs/     # PDF documentation for RAG
│   │   ├── examples/         # Downloadable assets
│   │   └── partials/         # Reusable content
│   ├── supplemental-ui/      # Chatbot UI files
│   │   ├── css/
│   │   └── js/
│   ├── antora.yml           # Antora module configuration
│   └── nav.adoc             # Navigation for your lab
├── k8s/                      # Kubernetes deployment manifests
├── .env.yaml.example         # Environment configuration template
├── deploy-backend.sh                 # Deployment script
├── patch-existing-showroom.sh # Script to add AI to existing workshops
├── Dockerfile                # Container build configuration
└── default-site.yml          # Antora site configuration
----

== 🧪 Local Development and Testing

=== Using Containers (Recommended)

For testing the static site content without the AI assistant:

[source,sh]
----
# Start the Antora viewer container
podman run --rm --name antora -v $PWD:/antora -p 8080:8080 -i -t ghcr.io/juliaaano/antora-viewer
----

For SELinux environments, append `:z` to the volume mount:

[source,sh]
----
podman run --rm --name antora -v $PWD:/antora:z -p 8080:8080 -i -t ghcr.io/juliaaano/antora-viewer
----

Then open http://localhost:8080 in your browser.

NOTE: Live-reload is not supported. You need to kill and restart the container when making changes.

=== Development Mode with AI Backend

For full development including the AI assistant:

[source,sh]
----
# 1. Set up environment
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
# Edit .env.yaml with your API keys

# 2. Install backend dependencies
pip install -r backend/requirements.txt

# 3. Start the backend
cd backend
export LLM_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export CONTENT_DIR="../content"
python app.py

# 4. In another terminal, build and serve the frontend
npx antora default-site.yml
cd www && python -m http.server 8080
----

== ⚙️ Configuration Guide

=== Environment Variables (.env.yaml)

Create a `.env.yaml` file from the template:

[source,sh]
----
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
----

**Required settings:**
[source,yaml]
----
# LLM API Configuration
llm_api_key: "your-openai-api-key"
llm_api_url: "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"  # Can also be set in assistant-config.yaml
llm_model: "gpt-4"                                          # Can also be set in assistant-config.yaml

# Content paths (usually don't need to change)
content_dir: "/app/content"
pdf_dir: "/app/content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs"
----

=== Assistant Configuration (config/assistant-config.yaml)

Customize the AI's behavior for your workshop:

[source,yaml]
----
workshop:
  title: "Your Workshop Name"
  focus: "Technology Stack"

system_prompt:
  introduction: |
    You are a helpful AI assistant for the {workshop_title}...
  
  guidelines:
    - "Be helpful and technically accurate"
    - "Reference workshop content when relevant"
    - "Provide step-by-step guidance"

ai_model:
  api_url: "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"
  modelname: "gpt-4"
  max_tokens: 1000
  temperature: 0.1

customizations:
  sample_questions:
    - "What is the main objective of this workshop?"
    - "How do I troubleshoot common issues?"
    - "Walk me through the first module"
----

=== MCP Configuration (config/mcp-config.yaml)

Configure Kubernetes tools available to the AI (optional):

[source,yaml]
----
mcpServers:
  kubernetes:
    command: "uvx"
    args: ["mcp-server-kubernetes"]
    allowed_tools:
      - "kubectl_get"      # View resources
      - "kubectl_describe" # Detailed resource info
      - "kubectl_logs"     # Container logs
      - "kubectl_get_events" # Cluster events
----

== 🚀 Deployment

The AI assistant uses a two-service architecture:

* **Frontend**: The workshop UI with embedded chatbot (deployed via your existing workshop deployment process)
* **Backend**: The AI assistant API service (deployed using `deploy-backend.sh`)

The `deploy-backend.sh` script provides an automated way to deploy the AI assistant backend service to Kubernetes/OpenShift.

=== Deploy Script Usage

[source,sh]
----
# Deploy to specific namespace (namespace is required)
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace showroom-user1

# Update configuration only (no rebuild)
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace showroom-user1 --config-only

# Deploy with content from a different workshop directory
./deploy-backend.sh --content-source ../my-existing-workshop --namespace production
----

=== Deploy Script Options

* `--namespace NS`: Specify target namespace (REQUIRED)
* `--config-only`: Only update configuration, skip container build
* `--content-source PATH`: Path to showroom repo for content (default: current directory)
* `--help`: Show usage information

=== What the Deploy Script Does

. **Checks prerequisites**: Verifies `oc` or `kubectl` access
. **Validates content**: Ensures proper workshop structure
. **Builds static site**: Uses Antora to generate workshop HTML
. **Builds backend image**: Creates container with AI assistant and content
. **Creates secrets**: Sets up API keys from `.env.yaml`
. **Creates ConfigMaps**: Deploys AI configuration
. **Applies manifests**: Deploys all Kubernetes resources
. **Monitors deployment**: Waits for pods to be ready

=== Manual Deployment (Alternative)

If you prefer manual control:

. **Create secrets** (replace with your actual values):
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl create secret generic ai-assistant-secrets \
  --from-literal=LLM_API_KEY="your-actual-api-key" \
  --from-literal=LLM_API_URL="https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions" \
  --from-literal=LLM_MODEL="gpt-4" \
  --namespace=your-namespace
----

. **Deploy with Kustomize**:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl apply -k k8s/
----

. **Verify deployment**:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods -n your-namespace
kubectl get routes -n your-namespace  # OpenShift
----

== 🖊️ Editing and Customizing Your Workshop

=== Adding Workshop Content

You can start editing the files in the `content/modules/ROOT/pages/` directory:

. **AsciiDoc Files**: Place your lab instructions here
   * The AI will automatically process these for RAG
   * Use standard AsciiDoc formatting
   * See existing module files for examples

. **PDF Documentation**: Place in `content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs/`
   * Technical reference materials
   * Architecture diagrams  
   * External documentation

. **Images and Assets**: Place in `content/modules/ROOT/assets/images/`

Many modern editors such as Visual Studio Code offer live AsciiDoc Preview extensions.

=== Understanding the Basic Template Directory Structure

[source,text]
----
./content/modules/ROOT/
├── assets
│   ├── images                       # Images used in your content
│   │   └── example-image.png
│   └── techdocs                     # PDF docs for AI assistant
│       └── sample-documentation.pdf
├── examples                         # You can add downloadable assets here
│   └── example-bash-script.sh       # e.g. an example bash script
├── nav.adoc                         # Navigation for your lab
├── pages                            # Your content goes here
│   ├── index.adoc                   # First page of your lab, e.g. overview etc
│   ├── module-01.adoc
│   ├── module-02.adoc               # Sample lab has 2 modules including index.adoc
│   └── ai-chatbot.adoc                   # AI assistant UI integration
└── partials                         # You can add partials here, reusable content inserted inline into your modules
    └── example_partial.adoc
----

=== Adding Additional Links

You can add links to external content in the convenient "Links" drop-down on the upper-right of the Showroom UI:

.content/antora.yml
[source,yaml]
----
asciidoc:
  attributes:
    page-links:
    - url: https://redhat.com
      text: Red Hat
----

=== Customizing the AI Assistant UI

The AI assistant UI is customized through Antora attributes in your `content/antora.yml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
asciidoc:
  attributes:
    # AI Assistant Configuration
    assistant_name: "Your Custom Assistant Name"
    workshop_title: "Your Workshop Title"
    welcome_message: "Your personalized welcome message"
    sample_question_1: "What technologies will we use?"
    sample_question_2: "How do I set up my environment?"
    sample_question_3: "Where can I find troubleshooting help?"
----

**Additional customization:**
* **Colors and themes**: Edit the CSS variables in `ai-chatbot.adoc` if needed
* **Backend behavior**: Update `config/assistant-config.yaml` for AI personality and responses

=== Dev Mode Extension

As a convenience to developers, the Dev Mode Extension (disabled by default) displays the asciidoc attributes you have to work with while writing your lab instructions.

Disable/Enable Dev Mode by changing `enabled: true` or `enabled: false`:

.default-site.yml
[source,yaml]
----
extensions:
  - id: dev-mode
    require: ./content/lib/dev-mode.js
    enabled: false
----

== 🔧 Architecture

=== Components

. **Frontend**: Static Antora-generated site with embedded chatbot UI
. **Backend**: FastAPI service with embedded RAG and MCP integration
. **RAG Engine**: TF-IDF vectorization with cosine similarity search
. **MCP Integration**: Kubernetes tools via Model Context Protocol

=== Data Flow

. User asks question in chat interface
. Frontend sends request to backend API
. Backend retrieves relevant content using RAG
. LLM generates response with context and optional tool usage
. Response streams back to user in real-time

=== Security

* API keys managed via Kubernetes Secrets
* RBAC permissions limit Kubernetes access
* Content processed locally (no external data exposure)
* Optional tool restrictions via allowed_tools configuration

== 📚 Usage Examples

=== Basic Chat
* "What is the main objective of this workshop?"
* "How do I get started with the first lab?"
* "Can you explain the architecture we're working with?"

=== Kubernetes Troubleshooting (with MCP enabled)
* "Check the status of my pods"
* "Show me the logs for the failing deployment"
* "What events happened in the last hour?"
* "Describe the service configuration"

=== Content-Specific Queries
* "Walk me through Module 3 step by step"
* "What should I do if I get a connection error?"
* "Explain the networking concepts covered in this lab"

== 🐛 Troubleshooting

=== Common Issues

**Chat not responding:**

* Check backend pod logs: `kubectl logs -n your-namespace deployment/ai-assistant-backend`
* Verify API key is correctly set in the secret
* Check network connectivity to LLM provider

**MCP tools not working:**

* Verify service account permissions: `kubectl auth can-i --list --as=system:serviceaccount:your-namespace:ai-assistant`
* Check MCP server logs in backend pod
* Ensure allowed_tools are correctly configured

**Content not found:**

* Verify content volume mounts in deployment
* Check RAG initialization logs
* Ensure AsciiDoc files are in correct directory structure

**Deploy script issues:**

* Ensure you're logged into your cluster: `oc whoami` or `kubectl cluster-info`
* Check if `.env.yaml` exists and has valid API key
* Verify namespace permissions for creating resources

=== Debug Mode

Enable debug logging by updating your config:

[source,yaml]
----
# In config/assistant-config.yaml
logging:
  log_rag_queries: true
  log_mcp_calls: true
  log_user_interactions: false
----

=== API Endpoints for Testing

Once deployed, test the backend directly:

* Health check: `https://your-backend-route/api/health`
* RAG search: `https://your-backend-route/api/rag/search?q=kubernetes&debug=true`
* Available tools: `https://your-backend-route/api/mcp/tools`

== 🤝 Contributing

. Fork the repository
. Create a feature branch
. Make your changes
. Test with a sample workshop
. Submit a pull request

== 📝 License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

== 🆘 Support

* **Documentation**: Check this README and inline code comments
* **Issues**: Report bugs and feature requests via GitHub Issues  
* **Community**: Join the Red Hat Developer community discussions

---

Made with ❤️ by the Red Hat Developer Experience team

Commit message:

use post-processed adoc with variables resolved before RAGging in

README.adoc, after:

= Showroom AI Assistant Template
:toc: left
:toclevels: 3
:sectanchors:
:experimental:

A generic, reusable AI assistant template for Red Hat Showroom workshops, built on the foundation of the https://github.com/rhpds/showroom_template_default[standard Showroom template^]. This template provides an intelligent chatbot that can answer questions about workshop content, provide guidance on lab procedures, and assist with Kubernetes operations through MCP (Model Context Protocol) integration.

== ✨ Features

* **🤖 Intelligent Chat Assistant**: RAG-powered chatbot with access to workshop content
* **📚 Content-Aware**: Automatically processes AsciiDoc lab instructions and PDF documentation  
* **🔧 Kubernetes Integration**: Optional MCP tools for cluster operations and troubleshooting
* **🎨 Modern UI**: Clean, responsive chat interface with workshop theming
* **⚙️ Fully Configurable**: Externalized configuration for easy customization
* **🚀 Easy Deployment**: Ready-to-use Kubernetes manifests and build scripts
* **📖 Multi-Format Support**: Handles AsciiDoc, PDF, and Markdown content
* **0% cruft**: Clean, minimal template structure
* **Red Hat Demo Platform UI Bundle default**: Consistent branding and styling
* **Dev Mode extension**: Displays asciidoc attributes for development

== 🚀 Getting Started for Workshop Authors

There are two ways to use this template:

=== Path 1: Start with This Template (New Workshop)

This approach is for creating a new workshop from scratch with AI assistant capabilities built-in.

. **Create a git repo from this template**
.. Suggested naming: `showroom_<lab-name>`
. **Clone your new repo and `cd` into it**
. **Add your workshop content** to `content/modules/ROOT/pages/`
. **Configure the AI assistant** (see <<Configuration Guide>>)
. **Deploy your workshop** (see <<Deployment>>)

=== Path 2: Add AI to Existing Workshop (Patch Approach)

This approach is for adding AI assistant capabilities to an existing showroom workshop.

. **Run the patch script** from this template repo:
+
[source,sh]
----
./patch-existing-showroom.sh /path/to/your-existing-workshop
----

. **Configure the AI assistant** in your existing workshop:
+
[source,sh]
----
cd /path/to/your-existing-workshop

# Customize the AI assistant UI by editing content/antora.yml
# Update these attributes with your workshop-specific values:
#   assistant_name: "Your Assistant Name"
#   workshop_title: "Your Workshop Title" 
#   welcome_message: "Your custom welcome message"
#   sample_question_1: "Your first sample question"
#   sample_question_2: "Your second sample question"
#   sample_question_3: "Your third sample question"

# Configure the backend
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
# Edit .env.yaml with your LLM API configuration
# Edit config/assistant-config.yaml for workshop-specific AI behavior
----

. **Add technical documentation** (optional):
+
[source,sh]
----
# Add PDF files to the techdocs directory created by the patch script
cp your-docs.pdf content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs/
----

. **Deploy the AI assistant backend**:
+
[source,sh]
----
# Deploy the AI backend service to your cluster
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace your-namespace
----

. **Redeploy the workshop frontend**:
+
[source,sh]
----
# Commit the patched files to your existing workshop repository
git add .
git commit -m "Add AI assistant capabilities"
git push

# Trigger a redeployment of your existing workshop
# This is workshop-specific and depends on your deployment setup:
# - For GitOps: The push above should trigger automatic redeployment
# - For manual deployments: Restart/rollout your workshop pods
# - For OpenShift: oc rollout restart deployment/your-workshop-name
----

The patch script copies the following to your existing workshop:

* AI assistant frontend UI (chatbot interface)
* Backend files (`backend/`, `config/`, `Dockerfile`, `.env.yaml.example`, `deploy-backend.sh`)
* Sample workshop files for reference
* Techdocs directory structure for PDF documentation

== 📁 Project Structure

[source,text]
----
showroom-ai-assistant/
├── backend/                    # FastAPI backend service
│   ├── app.py                 # Main application with RAG and MCP
│   └── requirements.txt       # Python dependencies
├── config/                    # Configuration files
│   ├── assistant-config.yaml  # AI behavior and prompts
│   └── mcp-config.yaml        # Kubernetes tools configuration
├── content/                   # Workshop content
│   ├── modules/ROOT/
│   │   ├── pages/            # AsciiDoc lab instructions
│   │   │   ├── index.adoc    # First page of your lab
│   │   │   ├── module-01.adoc
│   │   │   ├── module-02.adoc
│   │   │   └── ai-chatbot.adoc    # AI assistant UI integration
│   │   ├── assets/
│   │   │   ├── images/       # Images used in your content
│   │   │   └── techdocs/     # PDF documentation for RAG
│   │   ├── examples/         # Downloadable assets
│   │   └── partials/         # Reusable content
│   ├── supplemental-ui/      # Chatbot UI files
│   │   ├── css/
│   │   └── js/
│   ├── antora.yml           # Antora module configuration
│   └── nav.adoc             # Navigation for your lab
├── k8s/                      # Kubernetes deployment manifests
├── .env.yaml.example         # Environment configuration template
├── deploy-backend.sh                 # Deployment script
├── patch-existing-showroom.sh # Script to add AI to existing workshops
├── Dockerfile                # Container build configuration
└── default-site.yml          # Antora site configuration
----

== 🧪 Local Development and Testing

=== Using Containers (Recommended)

For testing the static site content without the AI assistant:

[source,sh]
----
# Start the Antora viewer container
podman run --rm --name antora -v $PWD:/antora -p 8080:8080 -i -t ghcr.io/juliaaano/antora-viewer
----

For SELinux environments, append `:z` to the volume mount:

[source,sh]
----
podman run --rm --name antora -v $PWD:/antora:z -p 8080:8080 -i -t ghcr.io/juliaaano/antora-viewer
----

Then open http://localhost:8080 in your browser.

NOTE: Live-reload is not supported. You need to kill and restart the container when making changes.

=== Development Mode with AI Backend

For full development including the AI assistant:

[source,sh]
----
# 1. Set up environment
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
# Edit .env.yaml with your API keys

# 2. Install backend dependencies
pip install -r backend/requirements.txt

# 3. Start the backend
cd backend
export LLM_API_KEY="your-api-key"
export CONTENT_DIR="../content"
python app.py

# 4. In another terminal, build and serve the frontend
npx antora default-site.yml
cd www && python -m http.server 8080
----

== ⚙️ Configuration Guide

=== Environment Variables (.env.yaml)

Create a `.env.yaml` file from the template:

[source,sh]
----
cp .env.yaml.example .env.yaml
----

**Required settings:**
[source,yaml]
----
# LLM API Configuration
llm_api_key: "your-openai-api-key"
llm_api_url: "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"  # Can also be set in assistant-config.yaml
llm_model: "gpt-4"                                          # Can also be set in assistant-config.yaml

# Content paths (usually don't need to change)
content_dir: "/app/content"
pdf_dir: "/app/content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs"
----

=== Assistant Configuration (config/assistant-config.yaml)

Customize the AI's behavior for your workshop:

[source,yaml]
----
workshop:
  title: "Your Workshop Name"
  focus: "Technology Stack"

system_prompt:
  introduction: |
    You are a helpful AI assistant for the {workshop_title}...
  
  guidelines:
    - "Be helpful and technically accurate"
    - "Reference workshop content when relevant"
    - "Provide step-by-step guidance"

ai_model:
  api_url: "https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions"
  modelname: "gpt-4"
  max_tokens: 1000
  temperature: 0.1

customizations:
  sample_questions:
    - "What is the main objective of this workshop?"
    - "How do I troubleshoot common issues?"
    - "Walk me through the first module"
----

=== MCP Configuration (config/mcp-config.yaml)

Configure Kubernetes tools available to the AI (optional):

[source,yaml]
----
mcpServers:
  kubernetes:
    command: "uvx"
    args: ["mcp-server-kubernetes"]
    allowed_tools:
      - "kubectl_get"      # View resources
      - "kubectl_describe" # Detailed resource info
      - "kubectl_logs"     # Container logs
      - "kubectl_get_events" # Cluster events
----

== 🔨 Building RAG-Optimized Content

Before deploying, you must build the RAG-optimized content. The Antora build process includes a special extension that exports workshop content with all AsciiDoc attributes resolved (like `{lab_name}`, `{ssh_user}`, `{guid}`, etc.), ensuring the AI sees the same content users see.

[source,sh]
----
# Build the site and generate RAG content
antora default-site.yml

# This creates:
# - www/ - The workshop HTML site
# - rag-content/ - Processed content for RAG (with resolved attributes)
----

**Why this matters:** Raw AsciiDoc files contain variables like `{ssh_user}` that aren't substituted until build time. The RAG export extension intercepts the build process after attribute substitution, giving the AI access to the actual values users see (e.g., "devops" instead of "{ssh_user}").

See `content/lib/RAG-EXPORT-README.md` for technical details on how this works.

== 🚀 Deployment

The AI assistant uses a two-service architecture:

* **Frontend**: The workshop UI with embedded chatbot (deployed via your existing workshop deployment process)
* **Backend**: The AI assistant API service (deployed using `deploy-backend.sh`)

The `deploy-backend.sh` script provides an automated way to deploy the AI assistant backend service to Kubernetes/OpenShift.

=== Deploy Script Usage

[source,sh]
----
# Deploy to specific namespace (namespace is required)
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace showroom-user1

# Update configuration only (no rebuild)
./deploy-backend.sh --namespace showroom-user1 --config-only

# Deploy with content from a different workshop directory
./deploy-backend.sh --content-source ../my-existing-workshop --namespace production
----

=== Deploy Script Options

* `--namespace NS`: Specify target namespace (REQUIRED)
* `--config-only`: Only update configuration, skip container build
* `--content-source PATH`: Path to showroom repo for content (default: current directory)
* `--help`: Show usage information

=== What the Deploy Script Does

. **Checks prerequisites**: Verifies `oc` or `kubectl` access
. **Validates content**: Ensures proper workshop structure
. **Builds static site**: Uses Antora to generate workshop HTML
. **Builds backend image**: Creates container with AI assistant and content
. **Creates secrets**: Sets up API keys from `.env.yaml`
. **Creates ConfigMaps**: Deploys AI configuration
. **Applies manifests**: Deploys all Kubernetes resources
. **Monitors deployment**: Waits for pods to be ready

=== Manual Deployment (Alternative)

If you prefer manual control:

. **Create secrets** (replace with your actual values):
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl create secret generic ai-assistant-secrets \
  --from-literal=LLM_API_KEY="your-actual-api-key" \
  --from-literal=LLM_API_URL="https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions" \
  --from-literal=LLM_MODEL="gpt-4" \
  --namespace=your-namespace
----

. **Deploy with Kustomize**:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl apply -k k8s/
----

. **Verify deployment**:
+
[source,sh]
----
kubectl get pods -n your-namespace
kubectl get routes -n your-namespace  # OpenShift
----

== 🖊️ Editing and Customizing Your Workshop

=== Adding Workshop Content

You can start editing the files in the `content/modules/ROOT/pages/` directory:

. **AsciiDoc Files**: Place your lab instructions here
   * The AI will automatically process these for RAG
   * Use standard AsciiDoc formatting
   * See existing module files for examples

. **PDF Documentation**: Place in `content/modules/ROOT/assets/techdocs/`
   * Technical reference materials
   * Architecture diagrams  
   * External documentation

. **Images and Assets**: Place in `content/modules/ROOT/assets/images/`

Many modern editors such as Visual Studio Code offer live AsciiDoc Preview extensions.

=== Understanding the Basic Template Directory Structure

[source,text]
----
./content/modules/ROOT/
├── assets
│   ├── images                       # Images used in your content
│   │   └── example-image.png
│   └── techdocs                     # PDF docs for AI assistant
│       └── sample-documentation.pdf
├── examples                         # You can add downloadable assets here
│   └── example-bash-script.sh       # e.g. an example bash script
├── nav.adoc                         # Navigation for your lab
├── pages                            # Your content goes here
│   ├── index.adoc                   # First page of your lab, e.g. overview etc
│   ├── module-01.adoc
│   ├── module-02.adoc               # Sample lab has 2 modules including index.adoc
│   └── ai-chatbot.adoc                   # AI assistant UI integration
└── partials                         # You can add partials here, reusable content inserted inline into your modules
    └── example_partial.adoc
----

=== Adding Additional Links

You can add links to external content in the convenient "Links" drop-down on the upper-right of the Showroom UI:

.content/antora.yml
[source,yaml]
----
asciidoc:
  attributes:
    page-links:
    - url: https://redhat.com
      text: Red Hat
----

=== Customizing the AI Assistant UI

The AI assistant UI is customized through Antora attributes in your `content/antora.yml` file:

[source,yaml]
----
asciidoc:
  attributes:
    # AI Assistant Configuration
    assistant_name: "Your Custom Assistant Name"
    workshop_title: "Your Workshop Title"
    welcome_message: "Your personalized welcome message"
    sample_question_1: "What technologies will we use?"
    sample_question_2: "How do I set up my environment?"
    sample_question_3: "Where can I find troubleshooting help?"
----

**Additional customization:**
* **Colors and themes**: Edit the CSS variables in `ai-chatbot.adoc` if needed
* **Backend behavior**: Update `config/assistant-config.yaml` for AI personality and responses

=== Dev Mode Extension

As a convenience to developers, the Dev Mode Extension (disabled by default) displays the asciidoc attributes you have to work with while writing your lab instructions.

Disable/Enable Dev Mode by changing `enabled: true` or `enabled: false`:

.default-site.yml
[source,yaml]
----
extensions:
  - id: dev-mode
    require: ./content/lib/dev-mode.js
    enabled: false
----

== 🔧 Architecture

=== Components

. **Frontend**: Static Antora-generated site with embedded chatbot UI
. **Backend**: FastAPI service with embedded RAG and MCP integration
. **RAG Engine**: TF-IDF vectorization with cosine similarity search
. **MCP Integration**: Kubernetes tools via Model Context Protocol

=== Data Flow

. User asks question in chat interface
. Frontend sends request to backend API
. Backend retrieves relevant content using RAG
. LLM generates response with context and optional tool usage
. Response streams back to user in real-time

=== Security

* API keys managed via Kubernetes Secrets
* RBAC permissions limit Kubernetes access
* Content processed locally (no external data exposure)
* Optional tool restrictions via allowed_tools configuration

== 📚 Usage Examples

=== Basic Chat
* "What is the main objective of this workshop?"
* "How do I get started with the first lab?"
* "Can you explain the architecture we're working with?"

=== Kubernetes Troubleshooting (with MCP enabled)
* "Check the status of my pods"
* "Show me the logs for the failing deployment"
* "What events happened in the last hour?"
* "Describe the service configuration"

=== Content-Specific Queries
* "Walk me through Module 3 step by step"
* "What should I do if I get a connection error?"
* "Explain the networking concepts covered in this lab"

== 🐛 Troubleshooting

=== Common Issues

**Chat not responding:**

* Check backend pod logs: `kubectl logs -n your-namespace deployment/ai-assistant-backend`
* Verify API key is correctly set in the secret
* Check network connectivity to LLM provider

**MCP tools not working:**

* Verify service account permissions: `kubectl auth can-i --list --as=system:serviceaccount:your-namespace:ai-assistant`
* Check MCP server logs in backend pod
* Ensure allowed_tools are correctly configured

**Content not found:**

* Verify content volume mounts in deployment
* Check RAG initialization logs
* Ensure AsciiDoc files are in correct directory structure

**Deploy script issues:**

* Ensure you're logged into your cluster: `oc whoami` or `kubectl cluster-info`
* Check if `.env.yaml` exists and has valid API key
* Verify namespace permissions for creating resources

=== Debug Mode

Enable debug logging by updating your config:

[source,yaml]
----
# In config/assistant-config.yaml
logging:
  log_rag_queries: true
  log_mcp_calls: true
  log_user_interactions: false
----

=== API Endpoints for Testing

Once deployed, test the backend directly:

* Health check: `https://your-backend-route/api/health`
* RAG search: `https://your-backend-route/api/rag/search?q=kubernetes&debug=true`
* Available tools: `https://your-backend-route/api/mcp/tools`

== 🤝 Contributing

. Fork the repository
. Create a feature branch
. Make your changes
. Test with a sample workshop
. Submit a pull request

== 📝 License

This project is licensed under the Apache License 2.0.

== 🆘 Support

* **Documentation**: Check this README and inline code comments
* **Issues**: Report bugs and feature requests via GitHub Issues  
* **Community**: Join the Red Hat Developer community discussions

---

Made with ❤️ by the Red Hat Developer Experience team
